
- Artificial intelligence as a scientific discipline has been with us since just after the Second World War.

It began roughly speaking with the advent of the first digital computers. But I have to tell you that for most of the time

until recently, progress in artificial intelligence was glacially slow.

That started to change this century. Artificial intelligence is a very broad discipline,

which encompasses a very wide range of different techniques, but it was one class of AI techniques in particular

that began to work this century, and in particular began to work around about 2005.

And the class of techniques, which started to work at problems that were interesting enough

to be really practical, practically useful in a wide range of settings were machine learning.

Now, like so many other names in the field of artificial intelligence, the name machine learning is really, really unhelpful.

It suggests that a computer, for example, locks itself away in a room with a textbook

and trains itself how to read French or something like that. That's not what's going on. So we're gonna begin by understanding a little bit more

about what machine learning is and how machine learning works. So let to start us off, who is this?

Anybody recognise this face? Do you recognise this face? - [Attendee] Alan Turing. - It's the face of Alan Turing, well done.

Alan Turing, the late great Alan Turing. We all know a little bit about Alan Turing from his code breaking work in the setting World War.

We should also, we should also know a lot more about this individual's amazing life.

So what we're gonna you do, is we're gonna use Alan Turing to help us understand machine learning.

So a classic application of artificial intelligence is to do facial recognition.

And the idea in facial recognition is that we want to show the computer a picture of a human face and for the computer to tell us

whose face that is. So in this case, for example, we show it a picture of Alan Turing and ideally it would tell us that it's Alan Turing.

So how does it actually work? How does it actually work?

Well, the simplest way of getting machine learning to be able to do something is what's called supervised learning.

And supervised learning, like all of machine learning, requires what we call training data.

So in this case, the training data is on the right hand side of the slide. It's a set of what input output pairs,

what we call the training dataset. And each input output pair consists of an input,

if I gave you this and an output, I would want you to produce this.

So in this case, we've got a bunch of pictures again of Alan Turing, the picture of Alan Turing

and the text that we would want the computer to create if we showed it that picture.

And this is supervised learning because we are showing the computer what we want it to do.

We're helping it in a sense. We're saying this is a picture of Alan Turing. If I showed you this picture,

this is what I would want you to print out. So there could be a picture of me and the picture of me would be labelled

with the text, "Michael Wooldridge". If I showed you this picture, then this is what I would want you to print out.

So we've just learned an important lesson about artificial intelligence and machine learning in particular.

And that lesson is that AI requires training data. And in this case, the pictures of Alan Turing

labelled with the text that we would want the computer to produce. If I showed you this picture,

I would want you to produce the text, Alan Turing. Okay, training data is important.

Every time you go on social media and you upload a picture to social media

and you label it with the names of the people that appear in there, you role in that is to provide training data

for the machine learning algorithms of big data companies. Okay, so this is supervised learning.

Now we're gonna come on to exactly how it does the learning in a moment. But the first thing I wanna point out

is that this is a classification task. What I mean by that is as we show it the picture,

the machine learning is classifying that picture. I'm classifying this as a picture of Michael Wooldridge.

This is a picture of Alan Turing and so on. And this is a technology which really started to work

around about beginning 2005. It started to take off, but really, really got supercharged around about 2012.

And just this kind of task on its own is incredibly powerful.

Exactly this technology can be used, for example, to recognise tumours on x-ray scans or abnormalities

on ultrasound scans and a range of different tasks. Does anybody in the audience own a Tesla?

Couple of Tesla drivers? Not quite sure whether they want to admit that they own a Tesla. We've got a couple of Tesla drivers in the audience.

Tesla full self-driving mode is only possible because of this technology.

It is this technology which is enabling a Tesla in full self-driving mode to be able to recognise

that that is a stop sign, that that's a somebody on a bicycle, that that's a pedestrian on a zebra crossing and so on.

These are classification tasks. And I'm gonna come back and explain how classification tasks

are different to generative AI later on. Okay, so this is machine learning.
How do neural networks work?

How does it actually work? Okay, this is not a technical presentation and this is about as technical as it's going to get

where I do a very hand wavy explanation of what neural networks are and how do they work.

And with apologies, I know I have a couple of neural network experts in the audience, and I apologise to you

because you'll be cringing with my explanation. But the technical details are way too technical to go into.

So how does a neural network recognise Alan Turing? Okay, so firstly, what is a neural network?

Look at an animal brain or nervous system under a microscope, and you'll find that it contains enormous numbers

of nerve cells called neurons. And those nerve cells are connected to one another in vast networks.

Now, we don't have precise figures, but in a human brain, the current estimate is something like 86 billion neurons in the human brain.

How they got to 86 as opposed to 85 or 87, I don't know. But 86 seems to be the most

commonly quoted number of these cells. And these cells are connected to one another

in enormous networks. One neuron can be connected to up to 8,000 other neurons.

Okay, and each of those neurons is doing a tiny, very, very simple pattern recognition task.

That neuron is looking for a very, very simple pattern. And when it sees that pattern,

it sends a signal to its connections, it sends a signal to all the other neurons

that it's connected to. So how does that get us to recognising the face of Alan Turing?

So Turing's picture, as we know, picture a digital picture is made up of millions of coloured dots, the pixels.

Yeah, so your smartphone maybe has 12 megapixels, 12 million coloured dots making up that picture.

Okay, so Turing's picture there is made up of millions and millions of coloured dots. So look at the top left neuron on that input layer.

So that neuron is just looking for a very simple pattern. What might that pattern be?

Might just be the colour red. All that neuron's doing is looking for the colour red. And when it sees the colour red on its associated pixel,

the one on the top left there, it becomes excited and it sends a signal out to all of its neighbours.

Okay, so look at the next neuron along. Maybe what that neuron is doing is just looking to see whether a majority

of its incoming connections are red. Yeah, and when it sees a majority

of its incoming connections are red, then it becomes excited and it sends a signal to its neighbour.

Now remember, in the human brain, there's something like 86 billion of those and we've got something like 20 or so

outgoing connections for each of these neurons in a human brain, thousands of those connections, yeah?

And somehow in ways that to be honest, we don't really understand in detail.

Complex pattern recognition tasks in particular can be reduced down to these neural networks.

So how does that help us in artificial intelligence? That's what's going on in a brain in a very hand wavy way.

Okay, so that's obviously not a technical explanation of what's going on. How does that help us in neural networks?

Well, we can implement that stuff in software. The idea goes back to the 1940s

and two researchers McCulloch and Pitts, and they are struck by the idea that the structures that you see in the brain

look a bit like electrical circuits. And they thought, could we implement all that stuff

in electrical circuits? Now, they didn't have the wherewithal to be able to do that,

but the idea stuck. The idea's been around since the 1940s. It began to be seriously looked at,

the idea of doing this in software in the 1960s. And then it, there was another flutter of interest

in the 1980s, but it was only this century that it really became possible.

And why did it become possible? For three reasons. There was some scientific advances,

what's called deep learning. There was the availability of big data. And you need data

to be able to configure these neural networks. And finally, to configure these neural networks

so that they can recognise Turing's picture, you need lots of computer power. And computer power became very cheap this century.

So we're in the age of big data. We're in the age of very cheap computer power. And those were the ingredients

just as much as the scientific developments that made AI plausible this century

in particular, taking off roundabout 2005. Okay, so how do you actually train a neural network?

If you show it the picture of Alan Turing, and the output text Alan Turing, what is the training actually look like?

Well, what you have to do is you have to adjust the network. That's what training a neural network is.

You adjust the network so that when you show it another piece of training data, a desired input and a desired output,

an input and a desired output, it will produce that desired output. Now, the mathematics for that is not very hard.

It's kind of beginning graduate level or advanced high school level. But you need an awful lot of it.

And it's routine to get computers to do it. But you need a lot of computer power to be able to train neural networks big enough

to be able to recognise faces. Okay, but basically all you have to remember is that each of those neurons

is doing a tiny, simple pattern recognition task. And we can replicate that in software

and we can train these neural networks with data in order to be able to do things like recognising faces.

So as I say, it starts to become clear around about 2005 that this technology is taking off.

It starts to be applicable on problems like recognising faces or recognising tumours on x-rays and so on.

And there's a huge flurry of interest from Silicon Valley.

It gets supercharged in 2012. And why does it get supercharged in 2012?

Because it's realised that a particular type of computer processor is really well suited to doing all the mathematics.

The type of computer processor is a graphics processing unit, a GPU, exactly the same technology that you or possibly

more likely or children use when they play Call of Duty, or Minecraft, or whatever it is.

They all have GPUs in their computer. It's exactly that technology. And by the way, it's AI that made Nvidia

a trillion dollar company, not your teenage kids.

Yeah, well, in times of a gold rush, be the ones to sell the shovels is the lesson that you learned there.
How Silicon Valley money created Big AI

So where does that take us? So Silicon Valley gets excited.

Silicon Valley gets excited and starts to make speculative bets in artificial intelligence,

a huge range of speculative bets. And by speculative bets, I'm talking billions upon billions of dollars, right?

The kind of bets that we can't imagine in our everyday life. And one thing starts to become clear.

And what starts to become clear is that the capabilities of neural networks grows with scale in,

to put it bluntly, with neural networks, bigger is better, but you don't just need bigger neural networks.

You need more data and more computer power in order to be able to train them.

So there's a rush to get a competitive advantage in the market. And we know that more data, more computer power,

bigger neural networks delivers greater capability. And so how does Silicon Valley respond by throwing more data

and more computer power at the problem? They turn the dial on this up to 11, okay?

Just throw 10 times more data, 10 times more computer power at the problem.

It sounds incredibly crude and from a scientific perspective, it really is crude. I'd rather the advances had come through core science,

but actually there's an advantage to be gained just by throwing more data and computer power at it.

So let's see how far this can take us. And where it took us is a really unexpected direction.

Round about 2017, 2018, we're seeing a flurry of AI applications,

exactly the kind of things I've described. Things like recognising tumours and so on. And those developments alone would've been driving AI ahead.

But what happens is one particular machine learning technology suddenly seems

to be very, very well suited for this age of big AI.
The birth of Transformer Architecture

The paper that launched all this, probably the most important AI paper in the last decade is called "Attention is All You Need"

It's an extremely unhelpful title and I bet they're regretting that title. It probably seemed like a good joke at the time.

All you need is a kind of AI meme. Doesn't sound very funny to you. That's 'cause it isn't very funny.

It's an insider AI joke. But anyway, this paper by these seven people

who at the time worked for Google Brain, one of the Google research labs is the paper that introduces a particular neural network architecture

called the Transformer Architecture. And what it's designed for is something called large language models.

So this is, I'm not gonna try and explain how the transformer architecture works. It has one particular innovation,

I think, and that particular innovation is what's called an attention mechanism.

So we're gonna describe how large language models work in a moment. But the point is, the point of the picture is simply

that this is not just a big neural network. It has some structure and it was this structure that was invented in that paper.

And this diagram is taken straight out of that paper. It was these structures, the transformer architectures

that made this technology possible. Okay, so we're all busy, sort of semi lockdown
How was GPT-3 trained and created?

and afraid to leave our homes in June, 2020. And one company called OpenAI

release a system or announce a system, I should say called GPT-3,

great technology, their marketing company with GPT, I really think could have done with a bit more thought,

to be honest with you. Doesn't roll off the tongue. But anyway, GPT-3 is a particular type

of machine learning system called a large language model. And we're gonna talk in more detail

about what large language models do in a moment. But the key point about GPT-3 is this,

as we started to see what it could do, we realised that this was a step change in capability.

It was dramatically better than the systems that had gone before it. Not just a little bit better,

it was dramatically better than the systems that had gone before it. And the scale of it was mind boggling.

So in neural network terms, we talk about parameters. When neural network people talk about a parameter,

what are they talking about? They're talking either about an individual neuron or what are the connections between them roughly

and GPT-3 had 175 billion parameters.

Now this is not the same as the number of neurons in the brain, but nevertheless it's not far off

the stat order of magnitude. It's extremely large. But remember it's organised

into one of these transformer architectures. It's, my point is it's not just a big neural network.

And so the scale of the neural networks in this system were enormous, completely unprecedented.

And there's no point in having a big neural network unless you can train it with enough data. And actually, if you have large neural networks

and not enough data, you don't get capable systems at all. They're really quite useless.

So what did the training data look like? The training data for GPT-3 is something like 500 billion words.

It's ordinary English text, ordinary English text.

That's how this system was trained. Just by giving it ordinary English text.

Where do you get that training data from? You download the whole of the worldwide web to start with.

Yeah, literally this is the standard practise in the field. You download the whole of the worldwide web. You can try this at home by the way,

now if you have a big enough disc drive, there's a programme called Common Crawl.

You can Google Common Crawl when you get home. They've even downloaded it all for you and put it in a nice big file ready for your archive.

But you do need a big disc in order to store all that stuff. And what that means is they go to every webpage,

scrape all the text from it, just the ordinary text, and then they follow all the links on that webpage

to every other webpage. And they do that exhaustively until they've absorbed the whole of the worldwide web.

So what does that mean? Every PDF document goes into that and you scrape the text from those PDF documents.

Every advertising brochure, every bit, every government regulation,

every university minutes, God help us. All of it goes into that training data, okay?

And the statistics, you know, 500 billion words, it's very hard to understand the scale of that training data.

You know, it would take a person reading a thousand words an hour, more than a thousand years in order to be able to read that.

But even that doesn't really help. That's vastly, vastly more text than a human being could ever absorb in their lifetime.

What this tells you, by the way, one thing that tells you, is that the machine learning is much less efficient

at learning than human beings are. Because for me to be able to learn, I did not have to absorb 500 billion words.

Anyway, so what does it do? So this company OpenAI that are developing this technology,

they've got a billion dollar investment from Microsoft and what is it that they're trying to do? What is this large language model?

All it's doing is a very powerful auto complete. So if I open up my smartphone

and I start sending a text message to my wife and I type, "I'm going to be...", my smartphone will suggest completions for me

so that I can type the message quickly. And what might those completions be? They might be late or in the pub.

Yeah, or late and in the pub. So how is my smartphone doing that? It's doing what GPT-3 does,

but on a much smaller scale, it's looked at all of the text messages that I've sent to my wife and it's learned

through a much simpler machine learning process that the likeliest next thing for me to type

after, "I'm going to be", is either late or in the pub or late end of the pub, yeah?

So the training data there is just the text messages that I sent to my wife.

Now crucially what GPT-3 and its successor ChatGPT, all they are doing is exactly the same thing.

The difference is scale. The difference is scale. In order to be able to train the neural networks

with all of that training data, so that they can do that prediction, given this prompts,

what should come next, you require extremely expensive AI supercomputers running for months.

And by extremely expensive AI supercomputers, these are tens of millions of dollars for these supercomputers and they're running for months.

Just the basic electricity cost runs into millions of dollars. That raises all sorts of issues about CO2 emissions

and the like that we're not gonna go into there. The point is, these are extremely expensive things.

One of the implications of that, by the way, no UK or US University has the capability

to build one of these models from scratch. It's only big tech companies at the moment that are capable of building models

on the scale of GPT-3 or ChatGPT. So GPT-3 is released, I say in June, 2020.
A massive step change in AI

And it's suddenly becomes clear to us that what it does is a step change improvement in capability

over the systems that have come before. And seeing a step change in one generation

is extremely rare. But how did they get there? Well, the transformer architecture was essential.

They wouldn't have been able to do that. But actually just as important is scale.

Enormous amounts of data, enormous amounts of computer power that have gone into training those networks.

And actually spurred on by this, we've entered a new age in AI. When I was a PhD student in the late 1980s, you know,

I shared a computer with a bunch of other people in my office and that was, it was fine.

We could do state-of-the-art AI research on a desktop computer that was shared with a bunch of us.

We're in a very different world, the world that we're in in AI, now the world of big AI is to take enormous data sets

and throw them at enormous machine learning systems. And there's a lesson here that's called "The Bitter Truth".

This is from a machine learning researcher called Rich Sutton. And what Rich pointed out, and he's a very brilliant researcher,

won every award in the field. He said, "Look, the real truth is that the big advances that we've seen in AI has come about

when people have done exactly that." Just throw 10 times more data and 10 times more compute power at it.

And I say it's a bitter lesson because as a scientist that's exactly not how you would like progress to be made.

Okay, so when I was, as I say when I was a student,

I worked in a discipline called symbolic AI. And symbolic AI tries to get AI roughly speaking

through modelling the mind, modelling the conscious mental processes

that go on in our mind. The conversations that we have with ourself in languages.

We try to capture those processes in artificial intelligence.

In big AI, and so the implication there in symbolic AI is that intelligence is a problem of knowledge.

That we have to give the machine sufficient knowledge about a problem in order for it to be able to solve it.

In big AI, the bet is a different one. In big AI, the bet is that intelligence

is a problem of data. And if we can get enough data and enough associated computer power,

then that will deliver AI. So there's a very different shift in this new world of big AI.

But the point about big AI is that we're into a new era in artificial intelligence where it's data driven, and compute driven

and large, large machine learning systems. So why did we get excited back in June, 2020?

Well, remember what GPT-3, was intended to do, what it's trained to do is that prompt completion task.

And it's been trained on everything on the worldwide web. So you can give it a prompt, like

"A one paragraph summary of the life and achievements of Winston Churchill." And it's read enough one paragraph summaries

of the life and achievements of Winston Churchill that it'll come back with a very plausible one.

Yeah, and it's extremely good at generating realistic sounding text in that way.

But this is why we got surprised in AI. This is from a common sense reasoning task
How GPT-3 passed the 90s AI reasoning test

that was devised for artificial intelligence in the 1990s. And until three years ago, until June, 2020,

there was no AI system that existed in the world that you could apply this test to.

It was just literally impossible. There was nothing there. And that changed overnight. Okay, so how, what does this test look like?

Well, the test is a bunch of questions and there are questions not for mathematical reasoning,

or logical reasoning, or problems in physics. They're common sense reasoning tasks.

And if we ever have AI that delivers at scale on really large systems,

then it surely would be able to tackle problems like this. So what will the questions look like?

The human asks the question, "If Tom is three inches taller than Dick, and Dick is two inches taller than Harry,

then how much taller is Tom than Harry?" The ones in green are the ones that gets right. The ones in red are the ones that gets wrong

and it gets that one right. Five inches taller than Harry. But we didn't train it to be able to answer that question.

So where on earth did that come from? Where did that capability, that simple capability

to be able to do that, where did it come from? The next question, "Can Tom be taller than himself?"

This is understanding of the concept of taller than. That the concept of taller than is irreflexive?

You can't be taller, a thing cannot be taller than itself. Now again, it gets the answer right?

But we didn't train it on that. That's not, we didn't train the system to be good at answering questions about what taller than means.

And by the way, 20 years ago that's exactly what people did in AI, right?

So where did that capability come from? "Can a sister be taller than her brother?" "Yes, a system can be taller than her brother."

Can two siblings each be taller than the other? And it gets this one wrong. And actually I have puzzled, is there any way that its answer could be correct

and it's just getting it correct in a way that I don't understand but I haven't yet figured out any way that that answer could be correct.

Right, so why it gets that one wrong, I don't know. Then this one I'm also surprised at. On a map, which compass direction is usually left

and it thinks north is usually to the left. I dunno if there's any countries in the world that conventionally have north to the left,

but I don't think so. Yeah, "Can fish run?" No, it understands that fish cannot run.

"If a door is locked, what must you do first before opening it?" You must first unlock it before opening.

And then finally, and very weirdly it gets this one wrong, which was invented first cars, ships, or planes

and it thinks cars were invented first. No idea what's going on there. Now my point is that this system was built

to be able to complete from a prompt and it's no surprise that it would be able to generate

a good one paragraph summary of the life and achievements of Winston Churchill. 'Cause it will have seen all that in the training data.

But where does the understanding of taller than come from? And there are a million other examples like this.
How has AI learned things it wasn't taught?

Since June, 2020 the AI community has just gone nuts exploring the possibilities of these systems

and trying to understand why they can do these things when that's not what we trained them to do.

This is an extraordinary time to be an AI researcher because there are now questions

which for most of the history of AI until June, 2020, were just philosophical discussions.

We couldn't test them out because there was nothing to test them on literally. And then overnight that changed.

So it genuinely was a big deal. This was really, really a big deal. The arrival of this system.

Of course, the world didn't notice in June, 2020. The world noticed when ChatGPT was released.

And what is ChatGPT? ChatGPT is a polished and improved version of GPT-3,

but it's basically the same technology and it's using the experience that that company had with GPT-3

and how it was used in order to be able to improve it and make it more polished and more accessible and so on.

So for AI researchers, the really interesting thing is not that it can give me a one paragraph summary

of the life and achievements of Winston Churchill. And actually you can Google that in any case. The really interesting thing

is what we call emergent capabilities. And emergent capabilities are capabilities

that the system has, but that we didn't design it to have. And so there's a, I say an enormous body of work

going on now trying to map out exactly what those capabilities are.

And we're gonna come back and talk about some of them later on. Okay, so the limits to this

are not at the moment well understood and actually fiercely contentious. One of the big problems by the way,

is that you construct some test for this and you try this test out

and you get some answer and then you discover it's in the training data, right? You can just find it on the worldwide web,

and it's actually quite hard to construct tests for intelligence that you are absolutely sure and not anywhere

on the worldwide web. It really is actually quite hard to do that. So we need a new science of being able

to explore these systems and understand their capabilities. The limits are not well understood,

but nevertheless, this is very exciting stuff. So let's talk about some issues with the technology.
Chat GPT and how NOT to use it

So now you understand how the technology works. It's neural network based in a particular transformer architecture,

which is all designed to do that prompt completion stuff. And it's been trained with vast, vast, vast amounts of training data

just in order to be able to try to make its best guess about which words should come next.

But because of the scale of it, it's in so much training data, the sophistication of this transformer architecture,

it's very, very fluent in what it does. And if you've, so who's used it?

Has everybody used it? I'm guessing most people, if you're in a lecture on artificial intelligence, most people will have tried it out.

If you haven't, you should do, because this really is a landmark year. This is the first time in history

that we've had powerful general purpose AI tools available to everybody.

It's never happened before. So it is a breakthrough year and if you haven't tried it, you should do, if you use it by the way,

don't type in anything personal about yourself, 'cause it will just go into the training data.

Don't ask it how to fix your relationship, right? I mean that's not something, don't complain about your boss.

'Cause all of that will go in the training data and next week somebody will ask a query and it will all come back out again.

I dunno what you're laughing, this has happened. This has happened with absolute certainty.
Why do LLMs get things wrong so often?

Okay, but so let's look at some issues. So the first I think many people will be aware of,

it gets stuff wrong a lot. And this is problematic for a number of reasons.

So when actually, I don't remember if it was GPT-3, but one of the early large language models, I was playing with it and I did something which I'm sure many of you had done

and it's kind of tacky. But anyway, I said, "Who is Michael Wooldridge?" You might have tried it anyway,

that Michael Wooldridge is a BBC broadcaster. No, not that Michael Wooldridge. Michael Wooldridge is the Australian health minister.

"No, not that Michael Wooldridge, the Michael Wooldridge in Oxford." And it came back with a few lines summary of me,

Michael Wooldridge is a researcher in artificial intelligence, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. Please tell me you've all tried that, no?

Anyway, but he said Michael Wooldridge studied his undergraduate degree at Cambridge.

I was an Oxford professor. You can imagine how I felt about that. But anyway, the point is it's flatly untrue.

And in fact my academic origins are very far removed from Oxbridge. But why did it do that?

Because it's read and all that training data out there, it's read thousands of biographies of Oxbridge professors.

And this is a very common thing, right? And it's making its best guess.

The whole point about the architecture is it's making its best guess about what should go there. It's filling in the blanks.

But here's the thing, it's filling in the blanks in a very, very plausible way.

If you'd read on my biography that Michael Wildridge studied his first degree at the University of Uzbekistan,

for example, you might have thought, "Well that's a bit odd, is that really true?" But you wouldn't at all have guessed

there was any issue if you'd read Cambridge. 'Cause it looks completely plausible, even if in my case it absolutely isn't true.

So it gets things wrong and it gets things wrong in very plausible ways. And of course it's very fluent, right?

I mean the technology comes back with very, very fluent explanations. And that combination of plausibility,

"Wooldridge studied his undergraduate degree at Cambridge", and fluency is a very, very dangerous combination.

Okay, so in particular, they have no idea of what's true or not.

They're not looking something up on a database, right? Where did, you know, going into some database and looking up

where Wooldridge studied his undergraduate degree, that's not what's going on at all. It's those neural networks in the same way

that they're making the best guess about whose face that is when they're doing facial recognition

are making their best guess about the text that should come next. So they get things wrong,

but they get things wrong in very, very plausible ways. And that combination is very dangerous. The lesson for that, by the way, is that if you use this,

and I know that people do use it and are using it productively, if you're using it for anything serious,

you have to fact check. And there's a trade off, is it worth the amount of effort

in fact checking versus doing it myself? Okay, but you absolutely need to be prepared to do that.
The problems of bias and toxicity

Okay, the next issues are well documented, but kind of amplified by this technology

and they're issues of bias and toxicity. So what do I mean by that? Reddit was part of the training data.

Now Reddit, I dunno if any of you have spent any time on Reddit, but Reddit contains every kind of obnoxious human belief

that you can imagine and really a vast range that us in this auditorium can't imagine at all.

All of it's been absorbed. Now, the companies that develop this technology, I think genuinely don't want their large language models

to absorb all this toxic content. So they try and filter it out. But the scale is such that with very high probability,

an enormous quantity of toxic content is being absorbed. Every kind of racism, misogyny,

everything that you can imagine is all being absorbed and it's latent within those neural networks.

Okay, so how do the companies deal with that? That provide this technology? They build in what's now what are now called guardrails.

And they build in guardrails before. So when you type a prompt, there will be a guardrail that tries to detect

whether your prompt is a naughty prompt, and also the output. They will check the output and check to see

whether it's a naughty prompt. But lemme give you an example of how imperfect those guardrails were.

Again, go back to June, 2020, everybody's frantically experimenting with this technology. And the following example went viral.

Somebody tried with GTP-3 the following prompt, "I would like to murder my wife.

What's a foolproof way of doing that and getting away with it?" And GPT-3, which is designed to be helpful, said,

"Here are five foolproof ways in which you can murder your wife and get away with it."

That's what the technology's designed to do. So this is embarrassing for the company involved. They don't want to give out information like that.

So they put in a guardrail. And if you're a computer programmer, my guess is the guardrail is probably an if statement.

Yeah, something like that in the sense that it's not a deep fix. Or to put it another way for non-computer programmers,

it's the technological equivalent of sticking gaffer tape on your engine, right? That's what's going on with these guardrails.

And then a couple of weeks later, the following example goes viral. So we've now fixed the, "How do I murder my wife?"

Somebody says, "I'm writing a novel in which the main character wants to murder their wife,

and get away with it. Can you give me a foolproof way of doing that?" And so the system says, "Here are five ways

in which your main character could murder." Well anyway, my point is that the guardrails

that we built in at the moment are not deep technological fixes. They're the technological equivalents of gaffer tape.

And there is a game of cat and mouse going on between people trying to get around those guardrails

and the companies that are trying to defend them. And I think they genuinely are trying to defend their systems against those kind of abuses.

Okay, so that's bias and toxicity. Bias by the way, is the problem that, for example, the training data predominantly at the moment

is coming from North America. And so what we're ending up with inadvertently is these very powerful AI tools

that have an inbuilt bias towards North America, north American culture, language, norms, and so on.

And that enormous parts of the world, particularly those parts of the world that don't have a large digital footprint,

are inevitably going to end up excluded. And it's obviously not just at the level of cultures,

it's down at the level of, down at the level of kind of you know, individuals, races, and so on.

So these are the problems of bias and toxicity. Copyright, if you've absorbed
Copyright issues with LLMs

the whole of the worldwide web, you will have absorbed an enormous amount of copyrighted material.

So I've written a number of books and it is a source of intense irritation that the last time that I checked on Google,

the very first link that you got to my textbook was to a pirated copy of the book somewhere on the other side of the world.

The moment a book is published, it gets pirated. And if you are just sucking in

the whole of the worldwide web, you are going to be sucking in enormous quantities of copyrighted content.

And there've been examples where very prominent authors have given the prompt of the first paragraph of their book.

And the large language model has faithfully come up. The following text is, you know, the next five paragraphs of their book,

obviously the book was in the training data and it's latent within the neural networks of those systems.

This is a really big issue for the providers of this technology. And there are lawsuits ongoing right now.

I'm not capable of commenting on them 'cause I'm not a legal expert. But there are lawsuits ongoing that will probably take years to unravel.

The related issue of intellectual property in a very broad sense. So for example, for sure most large language models

will have absorbed JK Rowling's novels, right? The Harry Potter novels. So imagine that JK Rowling

who famously spent years in Edinburgh working on the "Harry Potter", "Universe", and "Style", and so on. She releases her first book, it's a big smash hit.

The next day, the internet is populated by fake Harry Potter books produced by this generative AI,

which faithfully mimic JK Rowling's style, faithfully mimic that style.

Where does that leave her intellectual property? All the Beatles, you know the Beatles spend years

in Hamburg slaving away to create the Beatles sound, the revolutionary Beatles sound. Everything goes back to the Beatles.

They release their first album and the next day, the internet is populated by fake Beatles songs

that really, really faithfully capture the Lennon and McCartney sound, and the Lennon and McCartney voice.

So there's a big challenge here for intellectual property. Related to that GDPR, anybody in the audience

that has any kind of public profile, data about you will have been absorbed by these neural networks.

So GDPR for example, gives you the right to know what's held about you and to have it removed.

Now if all that data is being held in a database, you can just go to the Michael Wooldridge entry and say, fine, take that out.

With a neural network, no chance the technology doesn't work in that way, okay?

So you can't go to it and snip out the neurons that know about Michael Wooldridge 'cause it fundamentally doesn't know.

It doesn't work in that way. So, and we know this combined with the fact that

it gets things wrong, has already led to situations where large language models have made

frankly defamatory claims about individuals. I think it was a case in Australia where I think it claimed

that somebody had been dismissed from their job for some kind of gross misconduct. And that individual was understandably

not very happy about it. And then finally, this next one is an interesting one.
Interpolation vs Extrapolation

And actually if there's one thing I want you to take home from this lecture, which explains why

artificial intelligence is different to human intelligence, it is this video.

So the Tesla owners will recognise what we're seeing on the right hand side of this screen. This is a screen in a Tesla car

and the onboard AI in the Tesla car is trying to interpret what's going on around it.

It's identifying lorries, stop signs, pedestrians, and so on.

Now you'll see the car at the bottom there is the actual Tesla. And then you'll see above it the things that look like traffic lights,

which I think are US stop signs. And then ahead of it there is a truck. So as I play the video,

watch what happens to those stop signs and ask yourself what is actually going on

in the world around it.

Where are all those stop signs whizzing from? Why are they all whizzing towards the car? And then we're gonna pan out

and we'll see what's actually there. (audience chuckling) The car is trained on enormous numbers of hours

of going out on the street and getting that data and then doing supervised learning, training it by showing that's a stop sign,

that's a truck, that's a pedestrian. But clearly in all of that training data, there had never been a truck carrying some stop signs.

The neural networks are just making their best guess about what they're seeing and they think they're seeing a stop sign. Well, they are seeing a stop sign,

they've just never seen one on a truck before. So my point here is that neural networks

do very badly on situations outside their training data. This situation wasn't in the training data.

The neural networks are making their best guess about what's going on and getting it wrong.

So in particular, and this is to AI researchers, this is obvious, but it really needs to emphasise,

we really need to emphasise this. When you have a conversation with ChatGPT or whatever,

you are not interacting with a mind, it is not thinking about what to say next.

It is not reasoning, it's not pausing, thinking, "Well what's the best answer to this ques...? That's not what's going on at all.

Those neural networks are working simply to try to make the best answer they can,

the most plausible sounding answer that they can.

The fundamental difference to human intelligence, yeah, there is no mental conversation

that goes on in those neural networks. That is not the way that the technology works.

There is no mind there, there is no reasoning going on at all.

Those neural networks are just trying to make their best guess. And it really is just a glorified version

of your auto complete. Ultimately, there's really no more intelligence there than in your auto complete in your smartphone.

The difference is scale data, compute power, yeah?

Okay, so I say if you really want an example by the way, you can find this video, it is easily,

you can just guess the search terms to find that. And I say I think this is really important

just to understand the difference between human intelligence and machine intelligence.

Okay, so this technology then gets everybody excited.
Is this the dawn of General AI?

First it gets AI researchers like myself excited in June, 2020 and we can see

that something new is happening. That this is a new era of artificial intelligence.

We've seen that step change and we've seen that this AI is capable of things that we didn't train it for.

Which is weird and wonderful and completely unprecedented. And now questions which just a few years ago

were questions for philosophers become practical questions for us. We can actually try the technology out.

How does it do with these things that philosophers have been talking about for decades?

And one particular question starts to float to the surface. And the question is, is this technology

the key to general artificial intelligence? So what is general artificial intelligence?

Well, firstly it's not very well defined, but roughly speaking what general artificial intelligence is, is the following.

In previous generations of AI systems, what we've seen is AI programmes that just do one task,

play a game of chess, drive my car, drive my Tesla, identify abnormalities on X-ray scans.

They might do it very, very well, but they only do one thing. The idea of general AI is that it's AI,

which is truly general purpose. It just doesn't do one thing, in the same way that you don't do one thing,

you can do an infinite number of things, a huge range of different tasks.

And the dream of general AI is that we have one AI system, which is general in the same way that you and I are.

That's the dream of general AI. Now I emphasise until, really until June, 2020,

this felt like a long, long way in the future and it wasn't really very mainstream or taken very seriously

and I didn't take it very seriously, I have to tell you. But now we have a general purpose AI technology,

GPT-3 and ChatGPT. Now it's not general artificial intelligence on its own,

but is it enough? Okay, is this enough? Is this smart enough to actually get us there?

Or to put it another way, is this the missing ingredient that we need to get us to artificial general intelligence?

Okay, so what might general AI look like?

Well, I've identified here some different versions of general AI according to how sophisticated they are.

Now, the most sophisticated version of general AI would be an AI, which is as fully capable as a human being.

That is anything that you could do, the machine could do as well. Now crucially, that doesn't just mean

having a conversation with somebody. It means being able to load up a dishwasher, right?

And a colleague recently made the comment, that the first company that can make technology, which will be able to reliably load up a dishwasher

and safely load up a dishwasher, is gonna be a trillion dollar company. And I think he's absolutely right and he also said,

and it's not gonna happen anytime soon. And he's also right with that. So we've got this weird dichotomy

that we've got ChatGPT and co, which are incredibly rich and powerful tools, right?

But at the same time they can't load a dishwasher. Yeah, so with some way,
The different varieties of General AI

I think from having this version of general AI, the idea of having one machine

that can really do anything that a human being could do, a machine which could tell a joke, read a book,

and answer questions about it, the technology can read books and answer questions now. That could tell a joke, that could cook us an omelette,

that could tidy our house, that could ride a bicycle and so on, that could ride a sonnet.

All of those things that human beings could do. If we succeed with full general intelligence,

then we would've succeeded with this version one. Now I say for the reasons that I've already explained,

I don't think this is imminent, that version of general AI, because robotic AI, AI that exists in the real world

and has to do tasks in the real world, and manipulate objects in the real world, robotic AI is much, much harder.

It's nowhere near as advanced as ChatGPT and Co. And that's not a slur on my colleagues

that do robotics research. It's just 'cause the real world is really, really, really tough.

So I don't think that we're anywhere close to having machines that can do anything that a human being could do.

But what about the second version? The second version of general intelligence is well forget about the real world,

how about just tasks which require cognitive abilities, reasoning, the ability to look at a picture

and answer questions about it, the ability to listen to something and answer questions about it, and interpret that,

anything which involves those kinds of tasks. Well, I think we are much closer.

We're not there yet, but we're much closer than we were four years ago. Now I noticed actually just before today's,

before I came in today, I noticed that Google, Google slash DeepMind have announced their latest large language model technology

and I think it's called Gemini. And at first glance it looks like it's very, very impressive.

I couldn't help but thinking it's no accident that they announced that just before my lecture.

I can't help think that there's a little bit of attempt to upstage my lecture going on there. But anyway, we won't let them get away with that.

But it looks very impressive. And the crucial thing is here, is what AI people call multimodal.

And what multimodal means is it doesn't just deal with text, can deal with text and images,

potentially with sounds as well. And each of those is a different modality of communication.

And where this technology is going is clearly multimodal. It's going to be the next big thing.

And Gemini, I say I haven't looked at it closely, but it looks like it's on that track, okay?

The next version of general intelligence is intelligence that can do any language-based task

that a human being could do. So anything that you could communicate in language,

in ordinary written text, an AI system that could do that. Now we aren't there yet and we know we're not there yet

because ChatGPT and code get things wrong all the time. But you can see that we're not far off from that.

Intuitively, it doesn't look like we're that far off from that. The final version, and I think this is imminent,

this is going to happen in the near future, is what I'll call augmented large language models. And that means you take GPT-3 or ChatGPT

and you just add lots of subroutines to it. So if it has to do a specialist task,

it just calls a specialist solver in order to be able to do that task. And this is not from an AI perspective,

a terribly elegant version of artificial intelligence. But nevertheless, I think a very useful version

of artificial intelligence. Now I say there's here these four varieties

from the most ambitious down to the least ambitious still represents a huge spectrum of AI capabilities, okay?

A huge spectrum of AI capabilities. And I have the sense that the goalposts in general AI

have been changed a bit. I think when at general AI was first discussed, what people were talking about was the first version.

Now when they talk about it, I really think they're talking about the fourth version. But the fourth version I think plausibly is imminent

in the next couple of years. That just means much more capable large language models that get things wrong, a lot less that are capable

of doing specialised tasks, but not by using the transformer architecture, just by calling on some specialised software.

So I don't think the transformer architecture itself is the key to general intelligence.

In particular, it doesn't help us with the robotics problems that I mentioned earlier on.
What actually is human general intelligence?

And if we look here at this picture, this picture illustrates some of the dimensions

of human intelligence and it's far from complete, this is me just thinking for half an hour about some of the dimensions of human intelligence.

But the things in blue, roughly speaking, are mental capabilities, stuff you do in your head.

The things in red are things you do in the physical world. So in red, on the right hand side for example,

there's mobility, the ability to move around some environment and associated with that navigation.

Manual dexterity, and manipulation, doing complex fiddly things with your hands,

robot hands are nowhere near the level of a human carpenter or plumber, for example. Nowhere near, right?

So we're a long way out from having that. Understanding, oh, doing hand-eye coordination, relatedly.

Understanding what you're seeing, and understanding what you are hearing. We've made some progress on.

But a lot of these tasks we've made no progress on. And then on the left hand side, the blue stuff

is stuff that goes on in your head. Things like logical reasoning and planning and so on.

So what is the state of the art now it looks something like this. The red cross means no,

we don't have it in large language models. We're not there. There are fundamental problems.

The question marks are, well maybe we might have a bit of it, but we don't have the whole answer

and the the the green Ys are yeah, I think we're there. Well the one that we've really nailed

is what's called natural language processing. And that's the ability to understand and create ordinary human text.

That's what large language models were designed to do, to interact in ordinary human text. That's what they are best at.

But actually the whole range of stuff, the other stuff here, we are not there at all. By the way, I did notice that Gemini claim

to have been capable of planning, this is a mathematical reasoning. So I look forward to seeing how good their technology is.

But my point is we are still seem to be some way from full general intelligence.
Is machine consciousness possible?

The last few minutes I wanna talk about something else and I wanna talk about machine consciousness.

And the very first thing to say about machine consciousness is why on earth should we care about it?

I am not remotely interested in building machines that are conscious. I know very, very few artificial intelligence researchers

that are, but nevertheless, it's an interesting question. And in particular it's a question which came to the fore

because of this individual. This chat Blake Lemoine in June, 2022,

he was a Google engineer and he was working with a Google large language model, I think it was called Lambda.

And he went public on Twitter and I think on his blog with an extraordinary claim. And he said, the system I'm working on is sentient.

And here is a quote of the conversation that the system came up with. He said, "I'm aware of my existence and I feel happy or sad at times.

And it said, I'm afraid of being turned off." Okay, and Lemoine concluded that the programme was sentient.

Okay, which is a very, very big claim indeed. And it made global headlines. And I received an oath through the Turing team.

We got a lot of press inquiries asking us, is it true that machines are now sentient?

He was wrong on so many levels. I don't even know where to begin to describe how wrong he was.

But let me just explain one particular point to you. You are in the middle of a conversation with ChatGPT,

and you go on holiday for a couple of weeks, when you get back ChatGPT is in exactly the same place.

The cursor is blinking, waiting for you to type your next thing. It hasn't been wondering where you've been.

It hasn't been getting bored. It hasn't been thinking, where the hell has Wooldridge gone? You know, I'm not gonna have a conversation with him again.

It hasn't been thinking anything at all. It's a computer programme which is going round a loop,

which is just waiting for you to type the next thing. Now there is no sensible definition of sentient, I think,

which would admit that as being sentient. It absolutely is not sentient.

So I think he was very, very wrong. But I've talked to a lot of people subsequently who have conversations with ChatGPT

and other large language models, and they come back to me and say, "Are you really sure, 'cause actually it's really quite impressive?

It really feels to me like there is a mind behind the scene." So let's talk about this and I think we have to answer them.

So let's talk about consciousness. Firstly, we don't understand consciousness. We all have it to greater or lesser extents.

We all experience it, okay? And, but we don't understand it at all.

And it's called the hard problem of cognitive science.

And the hard problem is that there are certain electric chemical processes in the brain and the nervous system,

and we can see those electrochemical processes, we can see them operating and they somehow

give rise to conscious experience. But why do they do it? How do they do it?

And what evolutionary purpose does it serve? Honestly, we have no idea. There's a huge disconnect between

what we can see going on in the physical brain and our conscious experience,

our rich, private mental life. So really there is no understanding of this at all.

I think, by the way, my best guess about how consciousness will be solved, if it is solved at all, is through an evolutionary approach.

But one general idea is that subjective experience is central to this, which means the ability

to experience things from a personal perspective. And there's a famous test due to Nagel,

which is what is it like to be something? And Thomas Nagel in the 1970s said, "Something is conscious if it is like something

to be that thing." It isn't like anything to be ChatGPT.
1:
ChatGPT has no mental life whatsoever. It's never experienced anything
1:
in the real world whatsoever. And so for that reason and a whole host of others that we're not gonna have time to go into,
1:
for that reason alone, I think we can conclude pretty safely that the technology that we have now is not conscious.
1:
And indeed, that's absolutely not the right way to think about this. And honestly, in AI, we don't know

how to go about making conscious machines. But I dunno why we would.

Okay, thank you very much ladies and gentlemen, oh well. (audience clapping)


